# Advanced Input and Output

Now that we know almost all there is to know about pointers, we can begin
a proper discussion of input and output.  We have already seen a couple
of simple examples such as taking input from the command line and printing
output to the command line, but now we will talk about reading and writing
from files and reading from the command line interactively.

## Getting Characters

The simplest form of interactive input is getting characters from the user.
In C, this can be done with the `getchar` function which is from `stdio.h`.
Below is a simple example which gets the first character the user enters
and prints it back to them when they hit enter.

```c
// snippets/getchar.c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int c;
    c = getchar();
    printf("%c\n", c);
}
```

```
gcc snippets/getchar.c
```



Note that even if the user types multiple characters before hitting enter,
only the first will be displayed.  If we wanted to instead echo everything
the user entered, we could use a loop as in the below example.

```c
// snippets/getcharLoop.c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int c;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF) {
        printf("%c", c);
    }
    printf("--Done reading!--\n");
}
```

```
gcc snippets/getcharLoop.c
```



Note two things that may seem weird here.  First, we gave `c` the type `int`
and second, the condition of the while loop is that `c` is not `EOF`.  These
oddities are related.  We typically need some way to exit this input loop and
continue with the rest of the program.  You should know that `ctrl-c` can be
used to exit from a program when you are stuck in a loop, however we do
not want to exit the program itself but just this input loop.  To do this,
we can send a special value called `EOF` (End of file) by using `ctrl-d`.
This value is typically `-1` hence the possible need for `c` to be an `int`.
This value is also automatically fed if we were to use a file input rather
than the users keyboard by doing something like `./a.out < getcharLoop.c`

### Problem

How can we modify the above program to remove all whitespace from the input?

## Getting Fromatted Input

So far we have the tools to read the user input character by character, but
eventually we may want to store the user input into different kinds of
variables.  That is where `scanf`, the sibling of `printf` comes in.  It
performs very similarly to printf with the same placeholder syntax, except
that it is passed pointers (which it uses to modify the underlying values)
rather than actual values.

For example, the below program gets two numbers and an operation and prints
the result.

```c
// snippets/calc.c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int x, y, result;
    char op;
    scanf("%d %d %c", &x, &y, &op);
    if (op == '+') {
        result = x + y;
    } else if (op == '-') {
        result = x - y;
    } else if (op == '*') {
        result = x * y;
    } else if (op == '/') {
        result = x / y;
    }
    printf("%d\n", result);
}
```

```
gcc snippets/calc.c
```



One can also use `scanf` in a loop to continuously process user input.  This
is demonstrated in the program below which asks the user to enter numbers
that are added up and displayed at the end.

```c
// snippets/scanfLoop.c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    double x;
    double sum = 0;
    while ((scanf("%lf", &x) == 1)) {
        printf("added: %lf\n", x);
        sum += x;
    }
    printf("Sum: %f\n", sum);
}
```

```
gcc snippets/scanfLoop.c
```



Note two things about this code: First, we use the output of `scanf`.  The
output represents the number of parameters successfully formatted.  If it is 1,
the user entered a proper number that can be interpreted as a double.
Otherwise, they may have entered some garbage.  Second, there is not a very
elegant way to tell the program to stop summing numbers.  We have to use
our old trick of sending the `EOF` value with `ctrl-d`.  You might think
it would be nice to stop when the user enters a blank input (i.e. hits
enter with no number) but `scanf` simply ignores whitespace and will continue
waiting for the number input.

## Getting Strings

Just as we can get single characters from the user, we can also get entire
lines at a time by using `gets`.  The following example demonstrates the use
of `gets` to get lines until the user enters an empty line.  The result
of `gets` is then consumed by `sscanf` which is the same as `scanf` except
that it reads from a string rather than directly from user input.

```c
// snippets/gets.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

#define BUFSIZE 10

int main() {
    double x, sum;
    sum = 0;
    char line[BUFSIZE];
    while (gets(line) > 0) {
        if (line[0] == '\0') {
            break;
        } else if (sscanf(line, "%lf", &x) == 1) {
            sum += x;
        }
    }
    printf("Sum: %f\n", sum);
}
```

```
gcc snippets/gets.c
```



Note however, that this program may show you the output
`warning: this program uses gets(), which is unsafe.` and for good reason.
If a user enters a string longer than what can be stored by `line` the
behavior is undefined.  This means the program is buggy, but more importantly
it may be insecure and vulnerable to exploit.  We will now discuss an
alternative which does not have this vulnerability.

## Getting from Files

Getting data from files might seem like it should be different than reading
from input, but it's actually fundamentally the same.  This is because user
input (actually called standard input) is really a file.  First we will
reproduce the last example, but by using a file reading function, `fgets`
to read the user input.

```c
// snippets/fgets.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

#define BUFSIZE 10

int main() {
    double x, sum;
    sum = 0;
    char line[BUFSIZE];
    while (fgets(line, BUFSIZE, stdin) > 0) {
        if (line[0] == '\n') {
            break;
        } else if (sscanf(line, "%lf", &x) == 1) {
            sum += x;
        }
    }
    printf("Sum: %f\n", sum);
}
```

```
gcc snippets/fgets.c
```



There are three important differences in this code.  First, we use `fgets`
instead of `gets`, providing the maximum amount of characters we can accept.
This prevents the earlier issue of taking more input than we can handle.
Second, we check the first character of the input for being a newline rather
than a null because `fgets` includes newlines.  Third (and probably most
strange looking) is we provide the `fgets` function an argument called
`stdin` (meaning standard input).  This tells it to read from user input.

This code is much safer, however it does still have the issue that inputs
that are too long will be truncated.  For instance, entering just
`1234.56789` will result in a sum of `1234.5678` because with the null
character at the end, that is all that will fit.

To fix this, we can explicitly check that the input is within the acceptable
bounds by checking if the end of the string is a newline.  If it is not,
the input has been truncated and we should abort.

```c
// snippets/fgetsBetter.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

#define BUFSIZE 10

int main() {
    double x, sum;
    sum = 0;
    char line[BUFSIZE];
    while (fgets(line, BUFSIZE, stdin) > 0) {
        int len = strlen(line);
        if (line[len-1] != '\n') {
            printf("ERROR: input too long. Aborting.\n");
            return -1;
        }
        if (line[0] == '\n') {
            break;
        } else if (sscanf(line, "%lf", &x) == 1) {
            sum += x;
        }
    }
    printf("Sum: %f\n", sum);
}
```

```
gcc snippets/fgetsBetter.c
```



Now, instead of reading directly from `stdin` we could also read from a
regular file.  Let's take a look at how we can open a file and then read
it with `fgets`.

```c
// snippets/fileRead.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

#define BUFSIZE 10

int main() {
    char line[BUFSIZE];
    FILE *filePointer = fopen("snippets/test.txt", "r");
    while (fgets(line, BUFSIZE, filePointer) > 0) {
        int len = strlen(line);
        printf("%s", line);
        if (line[len-1] != '\n') {
            printf("ERROR: line too long. Aborting.\n");
            return -1;
        }
    }
}
```


```
hello
please
read
me
```


Note that this code is a bit buggy because we do not handle the case
where we fail to open the file.  This can happen if the path we gave it
does not exist, or if we do not have permission to read it.  If `fopen`
fails to open the file, it will return a null pointer, which we handle
in this next version.

```c
// snippets/fileReadBetter.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

#define BUFSIZE 10

int main() {
    char line[BUFSIZE];
    FILE *filePointer = fopen("snippets/notexist.txt", "r");
    if (filePointer == NULL) {
        printf("ERROR: file could not be found.\n");
        return -1;
    }
    while (fgets(line, BUFSIZE, filePointer) > 0) {
        int len = strlen(line);
        printf("%s", line);
        if (line[len-1] != '\n') {
            printf("ERROR: line too long. Aborting.\n");
            return -1;
        }
    }
}
```


```
ERROR: file could not be found.
```


This code is better but there is still one more thing we should do whenever
we open a file: close it when we are done.  You should always close the file
you have opened because some computers have limits on how many files can
be opened by a single program.

```c
// snippets/fileReadBest.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

#define BUFSIZE 10

int main() {
    char line[BUFSIZE];
    FILE *filePointer = fopen("snippets/test.txt", "r");
    if (filePointer == NULL) {
        printf("ERROR: file could not be found.\n");
        return -1;
    }
    while (fgets(line, BUFSIZE, filePointer) > 0) {
        int len = strlen(line);
        printf("%s", line);
        if (line[len-1] != '\n') {
            printf("ERROR: line too long. Aborting.\n");
            return -1;
        }
    }
    fclose(filePointer);
}
```


```
hello
please
read
me
```

