# Pointers and Arrays

This section discusses pointers and arrays, which are constructs for dealing
with more complexly structured data.

You can think of pointers as being a small piece of data that says where
another piece of data is.  As an analogy, consider a person's address like
41 Cooper Sq.  This address it enough for you to find the location and
anything inside.

Let's consider a neighborhood block of addressed and people:

```
[a0 a1 a2 a3 a4 a5 a6 a7]
[p0 p1 p2 p3 p4 p5 p6 p7]
```

Given an address, it's obvious how to find the person, though that
is not particularly useful.  The utility comes when several people
share an address.

```
[a0       a1    a2    a3    a4             a6         ]
[p0 p1 p2 p3 p4 p5 p6 p7 p8 p9 p10 p11 p12 p13 p14 p15]
```

Now with just on address, you can find multiple people, and there is no
limit to how many people you might find.  This is much more flexible than
storing only a single piece of data in a single variable.

## Pointers

In C, you can get the address of a variable with the reference operator
`&` and get the value of a reference with the dereference operator `*`

For example here is some code that initializes a variable, then initiaizes
a pointer to the address of said variable, and prints both.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/basicPointer.c"}
```

Note that when we initialize the pointer to our integer, we use

```
int *pointer
```

This means that `*pointer` is an `int`

Also note that actual value of our pointer is some large integer that has
nothing to do with the actual value that is points to.  This value represents
the value's location in "memory".  With that, you may be asking what is
the actual point of pointers?  The rest of this section goes through some
examples of use cases.

## Pointers and Function Arguments

The first new thing you can do with pointers is modify variables within
functions.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/noPointer.c"}
```

You can see from the above example, if you pass a variable into a function
and modify it there, it is not modified in its original scope.  This is
because the variable is copied when being passed to the function.  If we
want to modify the variable, we can instead pass a pointer as in the following
example.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/withPointer.c"}
```

This can be especially useful if we want to pass multiple pieces of
information from a function.  For example, remember our previous example
of finding a pythagorean triple.  Before we could not return our answer
because it consisted of three values.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/pointerTriple.c"}
```

See how in the above example, we pass the address of the variable we
wish to set with a function.

## Pointers and Arrays

Consider what code you would write if someone asked you to keep track of
a large number of similar objects.  For example, how would you track the
grades in a class of 15 people?  From what we have seen so far, there is
really no good way of doing this.  You could write a loop from 0 to 14,
but we have not yet seen any way of tracking the data outside of the loop.
That is where arrays come in.

An array can be declared and accessed with the special syntax demonstrated
below.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/basicArray.c"}
```

Now, while that's great, you may be asking what this has to do with pointers?
Well, it turns out this is essentially "syntactic sugar", and pointers are
really what we are using deep down.  This is demonstrated by the following
example:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/pointerArray.c"}
```

Note that while we set the elements of `b`, the elements of `a` are still
changed when we print them.  That is because both `a` and `b` are references
to the same underlying object.  However, that is not where the pointer fun
stops.  We actually do not need these brackets `[]` for indexing:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/pointerIndexing.c"}
```

So what's going on here?  Well, `int a[15];` is really saying to carve
out a block of contiguous memory, and put the address of the first one
into the variable `a`.  That means that the expression `(*a)` will be
the value of the first piece of memory we carved out, `(*a+1)` will be
the value of the next piece, and so on.  The one difference between
`a` and a regular pointer is that `a` cannot be changed.  So for example,
`a++` is not valid.

You may then ask, what if we go beyond our predefined length?  That behavior
is undefined, so anything could happen.  Usually your program will crash but in
usually worse case it can continue incorrectly.  This goes the same for
any pointer which does not reference an explicitly defined address, such
as a pointer not initialized to any value.

In C, a string (or piece of text) is represented by an array of characters.
You can initialize and print it as in the following example:

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/basicString.c"}
```

There is one hidden piece of machinery here specific to strings, however.
Each string should be "null terminated".  This means each string actually
has another hidden character at the end which is equal to zero.  This is
shown in the following example where we use this to find the length of a
string.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/nullTerm.c"}
```

### Problem

Let's look at a problem of analyzing grades.  We will print the array,
find its average, median, sort it, and create a histogram of the grades.

```c
int main() {
    double grades[10] = {100, 75, 63, 89, 100, 78, 90, 55, 88, 99};
    printArray(grades, 10);
    printf("Average: %.2f\n", averageArray(grades, 10));
    printf("Sorted Grades: ");
    sortArray(grades, 10);
    printArray(grades, 10);
    printf("Median: %.2f\n", medianArray(grades, 10));
    double histogram[5];
    gradeHistogram(grades, histogram, 10);
    printArray(histogram, 5);
}
```

## Address Arithmetic and Variable Sized Arrays

Note that so far, all of the arrays we have shown you have a fixed size length.
Here we will show a simple example of how we can simulate variable sized
character arrays by carving them out from a large fixed size array.  This
example is taken from "The C Programming Lanugage" by Kerninghan and Ritchie.

**Note** that you should usually not do this in practice, as C provides
better ways of creating variable sized arrays that we'll discuss later.

Our general strategy here will be to create a large fixed size array.  We will
have one function to reserve a given amount of characters from the array,
checking if there is enough space.  This is called allocation.  We will have a
second function free up that space when it is no longer used.  This is called
freeing.  We will reserve space by returning a pointer to the big array and
moving the next pointer to the right as we take up more space.  We will free
space by simply moving the pointer to the left.

You can think of this strategy as simply writing down characters on a page,
then erasing them to make more space.  But note that this strategy will not
allow us to erase characters in any order, we can only erase from right
to left.

We begin by declaring our allocation buffer `allocbuf` as well as the pointer
to the next free space, `allocp`.

```c
#define ALLOCSIZE 10000 // size of available space

static char allocbuf[ALLOCSIZE]; // storage for allocation
static char *allocp = allocbuf; // next free position
```

Note that we are using a macro and the `static` keyword which should be
familiar from the last section.  As a reminder though, the macro `#define`
simply replaces all cases of `ALLOCSIZE` in the text with `10000`.  The
`static` keyword on a global variable means that other files including this
one will not be able to access these variables directly.

First let's look at the allocation function.

```c
char *alloc(int n) // return pointer to n characters
{
    int spaceUsed = allocp - allocbuf;
    int spaceLeft = ALLOCSIZE - spaceUsed;
    if (spaceLeft >= n) {
        // It fits
        allocp += n;
        return allocp - n; // old p
   } else {
        // Not enough room
        return 0;
   }
}
```

The function declaration is similar to what we've seen before.
`char *alloc(int n)` means `alloc` is a function that taken an integer `n`
and returns a pointer to a `char`.  This pointer is a position in our big
array representing free space for the caller to use.

We need to check if there is enough space so first we calculate the space
we are using by subtracting the beginning of the big array, `allocbuf` from
the current pointer position `allocp`.  Then we calculate the space remaining
as the total space minus the used space.  This calculation is illustrated
below.

```
                                             ALLOCSIZE
        spaceUsed - x         spaceLeft - o  v
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxoooooooooooooooooo
^                           ^
allocbuf                    allocp
```

Note in the case where we have not yet allocated anything, `allocp` is
equal to `allocbuf` meaning `spaceUsed` is zero and `spaceLeft` is
`ALLOCSIZE` which makes sense.  We then perform a check to see if the space
remaining is more than what is requested.  If so we move the pointer
over so the next caller will get free space, and return a poiner to the
old position.  Otherwise, we return 0 (which is never a valid pointer)
signalling to the caller that the request failed.

Note the property of pointer arithmetic that this implies: the difference
between pointers (namely `allocp` and `allocbuf`) always represents the
number of objects between them (plus 1).  This is true regardless of the
type pointed to by each pointer, so long as they are the same.  That means
if our buffer was a buffer of integers, floats, or anything else this code
would still be valid.

Now let's look at the `free` function.

```c
void afree(char *p) // free storage pointed to by p
{
    if (p >= allocbuf && p < allocbuf + ALLOCSIZE) {
        // p within bounds of big array allocbuf
        allocp = p;
    }
}
```

This function is a bit simpler, let's explain step by step how it works.
First, the expression `p >= allocbuf` asks whether the position we are
trying to free from is at the start, or after the start of the big array.
The expression `p < allocbuf + ALLOCSIZE` asks whether the pointer is
before or at the end.  Note that as in the first function, the end of the
array is calculated as the start plus the size.  All in all, the expression
`p >= allocbuf && p < allocbuf + ALLOCSIZE` asks whether the pointer is within
the bouneds of the array.  Then, if it is, we assign the current pointer to
the given location `p`.  Note that this doesn't actually do any erasing,
it only means that future callers of `alloc` will be able to write over
whatever is there.

As a sidebar, this is actually a common feature of many storage systems.  This
is why why you "delete" something on your computer, it may not actually delete
it but simply mark its position as free.  This could allow you to recover files
you accidentally deleted, or for hackers to recover files you thought were
deleted.  This is also why you may get garbage values in an uninitalized
variable rather than all zeros.

Now, let's see our functions in action.

### Problem

Let's write a function to join each character in a string by a separator.
