# Pointers to Pointers and Arrays

Just as we can have pointers to characters, integers, and doubles, we can
also have pointers to pointers, or pointers to arrays.  This can be useful
for representing higher dimensional structures like a grid of numbers or
a list of strings.

First we will illustrate with a very simple example of a single integer.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/multiPointer.c"}
```

See how we first initialize a single pointer as before `*px = &x` but then
we go on to initialize a pointer to that pointer by adding another `*` to the
initialization, and using the reference operator `&` on the ponter itself.
We then repeat this pattern one more time to make a pointer to a pointer
to a pointer, `pppx`.  To get the original value, we must dereference with
the defererence operator `*` three times as done in the `printf` statement.
You could also dereference fewer times if you want one of the references
instead.

We can use this same technique to create an array of strings as shown below.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/stringArray.c"}
```

Note that by leaving the `[]` empty, the size of the array is automatically
determined by its initialization.  We could have put a value there.  In
particular, we could have put the value `3` as shown below since that
is the size of the array.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/stringArrayFixed.c"}
```

More importantly though, we could have also put a larger value which leaves
room for more strings in the future, as the code below demonstrates

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/StringArrayMoreRoom.c"}
```

We also didn't need to initialize the array with any names at all, it's just
fine to initialize it as empty and then add strings later as in this example.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/StringArrayEmpty.c"}
```

Note that while very similar, a pointer to string arrays is different than
a pointer to pointers of chars.  For one, the previous methods of
initialization are not legal with a simple pointer to pointers.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/stringArrayBad.c"],
"show": ["snippets/stringArrayBad.c"]
}
```

In addition, if you initialize a pointer to chars with a string literal
like in the below example, attempting to modify it is illegal and will
result in an error.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/stringArrayVsPointer1.c"],
"show": ["snippets/stringArrayVsPointer1.c"]
}
```

However this is only because it is pointing to the string literal which is
read-only.  If you instead switch the string pointer to point to the start of
the string array, as done below, it is fine.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/stringArrayVsPointer2.c"}
```

One final difference is that a string pointer can be incremented while the
array cannot, as shown in the following example.

```snippet
{
"build": ["gcc snippets/stringArrayVsPointer3.c"],
"show": ["snippets/stringArrayVsPointer3.c"]
}
```

You should note that whenver you pass an array into a function, it will never
truly receive the array, but a pointer which points to the start of the array.
This applies to all types of arrays, not just character arrays.

### Problem

How can we sort an array of names?

## Command Line Arguments

Now we have enough of a basis to start talking about command line arguments,
because these are mostly handled with string pointers.  It turns out that
in fact, our main function can take arguments, usually denoted by `argc`
and `argv`.  The `argc` argument is the "argument count" meaning the number
of arguments passed by the user.  The `argv` argument is the "argument
vector" meaning an array of actual arguments themselves.  The `argc`
parameter is a simple integer, and the `argv` parameter is a pointer to
character arrays.

Let's take a look at a simple example which simply repeat the inputs,
separated onto different lines.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/basicIo.c"}
```

This code is instructive but it isn't very useful.  Let's take a look at
a program that actually takes the inputs and does something useful, a
rudimentary calculator that adds all the inputs.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/bigSum.c"}
```

You can see the code is mostly similar to our basic example of printing
the inputs.  The major difference is that instead of printing the input,
we convert it to an integer by using the built in `atoi` (ascii to integer)
function which comes from the standard library, `stdlib`.  We add it to
our running sum, `sum` and print it at the end.

### Problem

How can sort our inputs and print them back sorted?

## Multidimensional arrays

Multidimensional arrays are useful for storing information which naturally
takes the shape of higher dimensions, such as images or videos.  Below
we demonstrate the usage of a two dimensional array to generate and store
a synthetic image, which we then print.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/multidimArray.c"}
```

Note that our basic strategy for producing this image is to look at the
previous row, apply some calculation, and use the result as our new value
of in the current row we are looking at.

Note something important here, we had to use macros to define the height
and width of our array because C would not allow us to create it from
variables.  This represents one of the key restrictions of multidimensional
arrays in C, and that is why it is more common to see regular pointers
to arrays.

## Void Pointers

It is possible to create a pointer which points to some location in memory,
but is not directly associated with any variable type.  Such an object is
called a void pointer.  Below is an example showing the creation of a void
pointer pointing to an integer.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/voidPointer.c"}
```

Note that while it was originally created to point to an integer, we can
interpret it in multiple ways.  In particular, we interpret it both as
pointing to an integer and point to a character by casting as each type
of pointer.  This can be useful when we want to write code, or functions
that apply to multiple types of data.

## Pointers to Functions

While functions in C are not technically variables, it turns out it is still
possible to have function pointers.  This conept of treating functions as
data hints at the idea of something called "functional programming".  However,
C is a not a "functional programming" language meaning it does not support
it well, so we will not discuss it any more here.

One particularly useful case for function pointers is to pass them to other
functions.  We demonstrate this with an "integral" function which can
approximate the integral of a function passed to it over a given interval.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/integral.c"}
```

Note that there is a bit of freedom as to how you pass function pointers
into another function.  We can remove the dereference operator, `&`, and
change `(*f)` to just `f` and the program would behave exactly the same.
We only put them here to be explicit about the fact that we are passing a
function pointer.

Now let's take a look and see if we can enhance our old sorting code with
this feature.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/sortCompare.c"}
```

There are a few things going on here.  First, the `sort` function has been
modified to work with `void` pointers rather than being hard coded as
`char` pointers.  This makes it compatible with a wider range of data
types.  Second, the `sort` function has been augmented to take in a function
pointer as a parameter.  Note that the expression
`int (*compare) (void *, void *))` says that the parameter is a pointer to
a function that accepts two void pointers.  You should notice at this point
however, that our comparison function doesn't actually take void pointers.
The way we get around this is by *casting* the function pointer with:
`(int (*)(void *, void *))(stringCompare)`.  This means that our function
will actually receive `void` pointers, but remember since we have `char`
in the declaration of the function, those parameters will be automatically
cast when the function receives them.

The above is fairly complex, but it can get even worse!

## Complicated Declarations

Overly complex declarations rarely come up in practice, however it is a good
idea to be able to interpret them in case you come across them in the wild.

This ]Medium article](https://medium.com/@bartobri/untangling-complex-c-declarations-9b6a0cf88c96)
is a great resource for understanding them.  I will summarize it here.

When looking at a declaration, follow this order of precedence:

0. Variable name
1. Grouping parentheses
2. Paranthses (containing nothing or types) or brackets (containing nothing or
a number)
3. Prefixed asterisk `*`
4. Type

For example, to interpret `char *a[];`, first look at the variable name, `a`,
Then brackets (containing nothing), then, the prefixed asertisk, then the
type.  Combining these in order we have: "a is an array of pointers to char"
If we instead wanted a pointer to an array of char, we could use grouping
parentheses: `char (*a)[];`

Going through the most complex example in the source:

```
char* (*(*foo[5])(char*))[];
```

0. `foo`: foo is
1. `foo[5]`: foo is an array of 5
2. `(*foo[5])`: foo is an array of 5 pointers to
3. `(*foo[5])()`: foo is an array of 5 pointers to functions taking
4. `(*foo[5])(char*)`: foo is an array of 5 pointers to functions taking character pointers
5. `(*(*foo[5])(char*))`: foo is an array of 5 pointers to functions taking character pointers returning a pointer to 
6. `(*(*foo[5])(char*))[]`: foo is an array of 5 pointers to functions taking character pointers returning a pointer to an array
7. `char* (*(*foo[5])(char*))[]`: foo is an array of 5 pointers to functions taking character pointers returning a pointer to an array of character pointers
```
